.\" @(#)rdseed.l 4.5;
.\"===========================================================================*
.\" SEED reader    |                rdseed                 |      manual page |
.\"===========================================================================*
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|     Manual page header definition     |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.TH RDSEED 1
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|     Command name and description      |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH NAME
rdseed \- Read an FDSN SEED format volume
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|           Command synopsis            |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.\" a short synopsis of the command syntax, including its options and arguments
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rdseed
.B "-{aclsSRtdoxzei} [-f filename] [v (n)] "
.br
.nf
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|           Command options             |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH OPTIONS
The following options may be selected:
.TP
.B \-a
retrieve the abbreviation dictionaries.
.TP
.B \-b
set the seismogram ouput buffer size.
.TP
.B \-c
retrieve volume table of contents.
.TP
.B \-l
list contents of each record in the volume.
.TP
.B \-q
set the rdseed output directory
.TP
.B \-Q
select the data quality flag
.TP
.B \-s
retrieve all station and channel header information.
.TP
.B \-S
extract a "weed" compatible station information file.
.TP
.B \-R
retrieve all response information in a "evalresp" compatible format.
.TP
.B \-t
construct a list of all event start/stop times and starting record numbers.
.TP
.B \-d
dump the data records
.TP
.B \-o
data output format 1=SAC, 2=AH, 3=CSS, 4=Mini-SEED, 5=SEED, 6=SAC ASCII, 7=SEGY
.TP
.B \-x
read the summary file
.TP
.B \-z
check reversals. Argument is btw 1..3 
.TP
.B \-e
extract event data (blockette 71) from seed volume.
.TP
.B \-i
ignore network codes.
.TP
.B \-v
specify the volume number [1-n] to process (default is 1).
.TP
.B \-f
specify the input filename (default is /dev/nrst0).
.TP
.B \-g
specify alternate response file(s), see Alternate Response Files below.
This takes precedence over any files indicated with the ALT_RESPONSE_FILE
environment variable.
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|         Command description           |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rdseed
reads from the input tape (or other input file) in the format 
defined by the Federation of Digital Seismographic Networks (FDSN),
popularly known as
the Standard for Exchange of Earthquake Data (SEED).
According to the command line function option specified by the user,
.B rdseed
will read the volume and recover
the volume table of contents (-c option),
the set of abbreviation dictionaries (-a option),
or
station and channel information and instrument response tables (-s option).

The desired volume on tape (or in a file) can be selected with the (-v option).
The first volume is "1" , the second "2" and so forth. (Note: this option is
only used when a physical volume contains more than one logical volume.

Two additional options allow access to detailed information concerning the
actual contents of the volume (rather than reading files purporting to contain
such information from the volume, for which one uses the -c option).
The first of these options (-t) 
writes out a list of data start and stop times
along with the starting records at which those data may be found.
(For the purposes of this discussion, a
.B record
is defined as a set of station/channel/time continuous data records.)
The other option (-l) is primarily a diagnostic tool; 
it writes a description of every record on the volume.

In order to extract data from the SEED volume for analysis by other packages,
the user must run
.B rdseed
in User Prompt Mode which is discussed below.
As data is extracted from the SEED volume,
.B rdseed
looks at the orientation and sensitivity of each channel and determines if
channel polarity is reversed. Refer to the description of blockettes 52 and 58 in
the SEED manual for a description of reversed polarity. A negative sensitivity
in blockette 58 is indicative of a reversed polarity. The user can request that
reversed channels be corrected. This correction is a simple multiplication by -1.0 .
The output response file information is NOT adjusted for channels which rdseed inverts.

.B Output Header Corrections
.br
.B rdseed
does correct the header information in the SAC, AH and CSS files as follows:
.br
SAC headers contain both scale factor and Dip/Azimuth information. If a Dip/Azimuth
reversal has been corrected, RDSEED will correct the Dip/Azimuth information in the SAC
header. If a negative sensitivity is corrected, the header SCALE value is also made
positive. If RDSEED finds both types of reversals, NO corrections to the data or
header are made.

CSS headers are handled in the same way as SAC headers. The header
information is found in CSS formatted relation files that are seperate from the
data files. These files are named RDSEED.WFDISC, RDSEED.SITE and RDSEED.SITECHAN.

The AH format presents a problem. There is no place for
Dip/Azimuth information. Headers contain only a scale factor. Therefore
when a Dip/Azimuth reversal occurs, there is no place in the header to
indicate that occurrance. Therfore the following rules are followed.
If the user has not requested dip/azimuth checking and one is detected,
.B rdseed
will invert the sign of the scale factor in the AH header. If the user has asked
for inversion checking, the data will be inverted and NO change in the
scale factor will occur. Negative sensitivity is handled the same way as in
the SAC and CSS headers. Again, if
.B rdseed
finds both types of reversals, NO corrections will be made.

For SAC and AH files, units of response are in Counts/M

./The (-z) option is used to select which type of inversion rdseed will correct.
./An entry of 1 selects dip/azimuth orientation, 2 selects sensitivity and 3 selects
./both.

./The channel response data can be output using the -R option. A file is generated
./for each channel of the format "RESP.sss.ccc" where "sss" is the station
./and "ccc" is the channel.

.B User Prompt Mode
.br
When rdseed is run without any options, the user is prompted for all
of the options as well as some additional options.
.TP
.B Input Device (/dev/nrst0)      : 
the input device can be changed from the default of /dev/nrst0. Note that when
a taoe is being accessed, it is best to use the norewind device. This allows
rdseed to search for multiple volumes on tape accross tape file marks.
.TP
.B Output Device (stdout)        : 
the output device can be changed from the default of stdout.
.TP
.B Volume # [(1)-N]              : 
volume number can be changed from the default value of 1.
.TP
.B Options [acsSrRtde]               : 
one of the options must be selected. All except "d" and "e" have the same 
meaning as the corresponding command line options.
.TP
the "e" option will generate a "weed" compatible event file.
.TP
If the "d", "s" or "S" option is selected, further selection can be made.
.TP
.B Summary File (None) 		 :
a rdseed summary file can be selected as input for rdseed. Used in conjunction
with "weed" to specify station time windows.
.TP
.B Station List (ALL)            : 
a list of selected stations separated by spaces or commas. Wildcard
substitution of characters "*" , "?" and "." is performed. A station name
can be that of an alias whose name is defined in a file whose filename is
specified by the enviornment variable SEEDALIAS. See details below.
.TP
.B Channel List (ALL)            : 
a list of selected channels separated by spaces or commas. Wildcard
substitution of characters "*" ,"?" and "." is performed.
.TP
.B Network Code (ALL)            :
a list of selected networks separated by spaces or commas. Enter ?? to disable
network processing. 
.TP
.B Location Code (ALL)            :
a list of selected location codes separated by spaces or commas. Enter CR to disable
location code processing.
If the "d" option is selected, further selection can be made.
.TP
.B Output Format [(1=SAC),2=AH,3=CSS, 4=miniseed, 5=seed, 
6=SAC ascii, 7=SEGY]  : 
select output format as SAC, AH, CSS 3.0 binary, mini seed, seed, SAC ascii or SEGY; default is SAC.
.TP
.B Check Reversal [(0=No), 1=Dip.Azimuth, 2=Gain, 3=Both]: 
select signal reversal checking; default is No.
.TP
.B Select Data Type [(E=Everything), D=Data of Undetermined State, R=Raw waveform Data, Q=QC'd data] :
select data quality to processes.
.TP
.B Start Time(s) (FIRST)         : 
a list of seismogram start times of the form YYYY.DDD.HH:MM:SS.FFFF or
YYYY/MM/DD.HH:MM:SS.FFFF separated by spaces. YYYY may be YY i.e. "90"
for "1990". Least significant parts may be omitted, in which case they
become zero i.e. "90.270" is time 00:00:00.000 of the 270th day of 1990.
.TP
.B End Time(s) (LAST)            : 
a list of seismogram end times of the same form as start times. Each
start time (except the last one) must have a corresponding end time.
If the last start time does not have a corresponding end time, the end
time is assumed to be the last time in the volume.
.TP
.B Sample Buffer Length [2000000]: 
each seismogram is assembled in a sample buffer prior to output. The size
of the buffer can be changed. This number is the number of samples. If the
length is too small for the any of the requested seismograms an error
message will inform the user that the waveform is being broken into
pieces. The user may increase the size of the buffer to avoid this
problem.
.TP
.B Extract Responses [Y/(N)]     : 
channel response extraction is selected via this prompt.
 
.SH Alternate Response Files

The user can specify that station configuration and responses be taken
from another SEED volume. This will allow for two possible scenarios
to be accomplished. First, if station information is found to be in
error, the user can use the headers from another SEED volume that is known
to be correct. Second, if the SEED volume is a "data-only" volume (MINI-SEED),
the user can use a "data-less" SEED volume and the "data-only" SEED volume
to extract the desired waveforms. So you say, "how do I do this?". The
environment variable ALT_RESPONSE_FILE should be defined with its value
being the path name of the SEED volume from which responses should be
taken.


.SH The Alias File 

An alias file can be defined which contains a list of station alias names.
The first word in each line of the file is the alias. The following words
are station names which will match the corresponding alias. The alias file
name must be defined in the SEEDALIAS environment variable. For example,
the file rdseed.alias contains the following:

CHINA BJI XIAN SHNG

All references to station CHINA will match station BJI, XIAN or SHNG.

The source code is written in such a way that it will run, with recompilation,
on both big-endian (e.g., Sun) and little-endian machines (e.g., VAX) under
UNIX.  This program has not yet been tested under VAX VMS.

.SH Time Tear Tolerance

Normally, the tolerance for determining time tears is found in the station
header information. Some stations may have clocks that wander excessively. This may
cause time tears in the data. The drift tolerance can be adjusted by defining an
environment variable called SEEDTOLERANCE. Its value is multipled by a drift tolerance
that is contained in the SEED volume for each channel.
Thus a value of 3.0 will increase the drift tolerance by a factor of three. Drift
is defined in units of "seconds per sample" and is typically around .00005 sec/smp.

.SH Rdseed Alert message file

When rdseed determines that data reversal is necessary and the user specifies that rdseed should reverse the data, rdseed creates a file with the data reversal information inside. This information includes the file name where the reversal was applied. When you exit the program, a message is displayed reminding you to look at this file. 

This file is called rdseed.alert.log and is located in the startup directory.

.SH Rdseed error logging

All rdseed error messages are logged to a file, called rdseed.error.log with the date. This file is appended to throughout the day.

.SH Data Recovery
.br
There are two necessary steps to recovering seismograms from a SEED tape.

The first step consists of finding out what is on the tape; one does this
by using any of the command line options -c or -t,
to list the station and channel names, starting times, and record numbers
of the seismograms contained in the volume. 

Seismic data are recovered from SEED tapes in the second step. Using the station,
channel and time information, use User Prompt Mode to select start and stop times for
individual seismograms.

Seismogram files are written to the current directory with names of the
form

.br
	yyyy.ddd.hh.mm.ss.ffff.SSSSS.CCC.SAC  for SAC Files
.br
	yyyy.ddd.hh.mm.ss.ffff.SSSSS.CCC.AH   for AH  Files
.br
	yy.ddd.hh.mm.ss.ffff/SSSSS.CCC.w      for CSS Files
.br     
	mini.seed                             for mini seed
.br 	
	yyyy.ddd.hh.mm.ss.ffff.SSSSS.CCC.SAC_ASC for sac ascii
.br	
	yyyy.ddd.hh.mm.ss.ffff.SSSSS.CCC.SEGY for SEGY
.br

where yyyy is the year,
ddd is the Julian day,
hh.mm.ss.ffff is the time of day of the start of the first record,
SSSSS is the station name, and
CCC is the component name for the particular seismogram being recovered.
This seismogram file naming convention was chosen to provide unique names to
output files
without user intervention; however, the large number of files which
can be generated to a single directory 
might cause problems for some operating systems.
Notice that CSS uses a slightly different format that puts channel data in
subdirectories. This is due to a limitation in the filename field in the
CSS database. For CSS there are three additional files created, RDSEED.WFDISC,
RDSEED.SITE and RDSEED.SITECHAN. These files are used by the CSS database system.

Be aware that rdseed always appends onto the mini.seed file. You need to
manually remove this file if you wish to start over.

.SH Recovering auxiliary data from an FDSN SEED volume.
.br
One may also retrieve the set of abbreviation dictionaries or the set of
station information tables from an FDSN SEED volume.  
The former is accomplished with the command
.br
.B	rdseed -af inputfile 
.br
while the latter results from 
.br
.B	rdseed -sf inputfile 
.br
Output from these commands should be redirected to files, as in examples
6 and 7.
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|              Diagnostics              |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
Various warnings and error messages are issued to the standard error device 
by the procedure.
Typical response of the procedure to a warning condition is to write a message
to the standard error device and then to continue execution. 
An error condition, on the other hand, will cause a message to be generated
to the standard error device followed by immediate termination of the procedure.
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|                Examples               |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH EXAMPLES
1.  Reading the table of contents from a volume.
.br
	rdseed -cf /dev/rmt8 > tape.contents &
                         or
.br
	rdseed
.br
	Input Device (/dev/rst0)      : /dev/rmt8
.br
	Output Device (stdout)        : tape.contents
.br
	Volume #         [(1)-N]      :
.br
	Options          [acsSrRtde]  : c

reads the table of contents from the tape on device /dev/rmt8
into a file called tape.contents; the job is run in the background (command line
example).
Output directed to "stderr", such as error messages, comes to the terminal.
Table-of-contents entries have the format
.br
  AFI    LPZ      1988,228,00:00:00.68          1         147
.br
where the columns represent station name, channel name, start time, 
location flag (here, a blank), subsequence number, and starting record number.

2.  Determining event start/stop times on a volume.
.br
	rdseed -tvf 2 image > image.times &
                         or
	rdseed
.br
	Input Device (/dev/rst0)      : image
.br
	Output Device (stdout)        : image.times
.br
	Volume #         [(1)-N]      : 2
.br
	Options          [acsSrRtde]  : t

reads a disk file called "image" and creates 
a table containing starting record numbers, station and channel names, start and stop times
of events, nominal sample rate, calculated sample rate and numbers of samples
for that file.
Output is written to the file "image.times".
The lines of the output table have the format
.br
119  ANMO  LPZ  1988,230,00:00:00.6800  1988,230,18:35:04.6800  1.00  66904
.br
where the columns represent station name, channel name, start time, end time,
sample rate in samples per second, number of samples, and starting record number
for these data.

3.  Creating a detailed list of the contents of a volume.
.br
	rdseed -lf /dev/rmt11 > tape.list &
.br
reads a tape on drive mt11 and writes a list of the contents of each record
to a file called tape.list.
The job is run in the background.

4.  Reading all data from a tape.
.br
	rdseed
.br
	Input Device (/dev/rst0)       : /dev/rmt8
.br
	Output Device (stdout)         : tape.extraction.list
.br
	Volume #         [(1)-N]       :
.br
	Options          [acsSrRtde]   : d
.br
	Station List (ALL)             : 
.br
	Channel List (ALL)             : 
.br
	Output format [(1-SAC),2-AH...]:
.br
	Start Time(s) (FIRST)          : 
.br
	End Time(s) (LAST)             : 
.br
	Sample Buffer Length [2000000] : 
.br
	Extract Responses [Y/(N)]      : 

reads all seismograms from the tape on device /dev/rmt8
into the current directory, writes "stdout" output to a file.

5.  Reading the abbreviation dictionaries.
.br
	rdseed -af tape.image > tape.abbreviation.dictionaries 
                         or
	rdseed
.br
	Input Device (/dev/rst0)      : tape.image
.br
	Output Device (stdout)        : tape.abbreviation.dictionaries
.br
	Volume #         [(1)-N]      : 1
.br
	Options          [acsSrRtde]  : a

extracts the abbreviation dictionaries from a tape image stored on disk,
sends the result to a file, and runs in the foreground.

6.  Reading station information.
.br
	rdseed -sf /dev/rmt8 > tape.station.information &
                         or
	rdseed
.br
	Input Device (/dev/rst0)      : /dev/rmt8
.br
	Output Device (stdout)        : tape.station.information
.br
	Volume #         [(1)-N]      : 1
.br
	Options          [acsSrRtde]  : s

recovers station and channel location and response information from the tape
on device /dev/rmt8, writes the information to a file, and in the command line form
runs in the background.

7.  Reading specific station/channel/time information.
.br
	rdseed
.br
	Input Device (/dev/rst0)      : /dev/rmt8
.br
	Output Device (stdout)        : tape.station.information
.br
	Volume #         [(1)-N]      : 2
.br
	Options          [acsSrRtde]  : d
.br 	
	Summary File (None)	      :
.br
	Station List (ALL)            : BJI YKW1
.br
	Channel List (ALL)            : *Z
.br
	Network List (ALL)	      :
.br
	Output format [(1-SAC),2-AH..]:
.br
	Start Time(s) (FIRST)         : 1990,270,20:30
.br
	End Time(s) (LAST)            : 1991/2/1
.br
	Sample Buffer Length [2000000]: 3000000
.br
	Extract Responses [Y/(N)]     : Y

reads all seismograms from stations BJI and YKW1, all Z channels,
from year 1900, julian day 270, hour 20, minute 30 to Febuaury 1, 1991.
The buffer size was increased to 3 million samples and the channel response
information will be output.

.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|         Files used or created         |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.\" names of files that this command used or creates
.SH FILES
yyyy,ddd,hh.mm.ss.ffff.SSSSS.CCC - seismogram files as described above

mini.seed - file of mini seed data

rdseed.err_log.MM.DD.YY - a log of all error messages created during the day's usage.

rdseed.alert_log - file created when rdseed reverses the data.

.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|Other relevant commands, files, manuals|===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH SEE ALSO
Halbert, S. E., R. Buland, and C. R. Hutt (1988).  Standard for
the Exchange of Earthquake Data (SEED), Version V2.0,
February 25, 1988.  United States Geological Survey,
Albuquerque Seismological Laboratory, Building 10002, Kirtland Air Force
Base East, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87115.  82 pp.

O'Neill, D. (1987).  IRIS Interim Data Distribution Format
(SAC ASCII), Version 1.0 (12 November 1987).  Incorporated
Research Institutions for Seismology, 1616 North Fort Myer
Drive, Suite 1440, Arlington, Virginia 22209.  11 pp.

Tull, J. (1987).  SAC User's Manual, Version 10.2, October 7,
1987.  Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, L-205,
Livermore, California 94550.  ??? pp.
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|    Known problems with the command    |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH BUGS

The -d option dumps all records .

Address bug reports to Chris Laughbon at IRIS DMC, 206-547-0393,
or send ARPAnet mail to chris@iris.washington.edu .  
Please DO NOT "fix bugs" locally without telling the author about them.
.B
Please DO NOT redistribute this program.
Address requests for the program to IRIS at the numbers given above.
.\"                *=======================================*
.\"================|             Author's name             |===================
.\"                *=======================================*
.SH AUTHOR
Dennis O'Neill; Allen Nance, IRIS
